[THEME MUSIC]
>>REGINA MEREDITH: Imagine if we
had as much control of our fate
and our dreams as we
have in our daily lives.
Adepts throughout
history have always
been able to use dream time as
their playground of experience,
practice, and learning through
the state of lucid dreaming.
How would your
night world change
if you had choices on how
your dreams played out?
Jared Zeizel, lucid
dreamer, and co-author
of "The Field Guide to Lucid
Dreaming," is with us today.
And I have to say,
I love your book.
I love the illustrations,
the practicality,
the down-to-earth.
It is a fabulous
guide to dreaming.
>>JARED ZEIZEL: Oh, thank you.
>>REGINA: I just love it.
And I thought first of
all, we'd start out-- you
have a term in here.
And it's onironauts?
>>ZEIZEL: Well, what it
means is dream explorer.
So you know, you have astronaut,
you know, explorer of space.
Oneiro, meaning dream, is
sort of a dream explorer,
or explorer of dreams.
And so that's oneironaut,
or oneironaut, however
it's pronounced, it's
basically something
lucid dreamers
can identify with,
as they are essentially
explorers of their dreams.
>>REGINA: I think we've
all had this experience.
And you talk about
it early in the book,
it comes up where we wake up.
And many people feel like
they cheated themselves.
After you've been gone
exploring all night long,
and you wake up, and it's,
oh, I won't forget that.
That was so interesting.
And poof, your mind
engages upon awakening.
You change your body position.
It's all gone.
>>ZEIZEL: There's
some loose statistics
that after 5 minutes of
being awake, 50% of the dream
will be gone.
After 10 minutes, 90%.
So we often say, write
down your dreams.
Because the act of writing it
down reinforces the memory.
It also gives you this excellent
journal of your exploration
into the dream world.
>>REGINA: Well, and
this is saying--
I mean, there are
certain philosophies
that say that's the real world,
and this is the illusory world.
>>ZEIZEL: That's true.
And I like to think, like--
take, for example, you
go into the dream world
and you have this
phenomenal dream.
And you remember it, too.
And you're flying.
You're doing all these things
that you can't physically
do in this world.
And some might say, like, well,
isn't that world much better?
Shouldn't this be,
like, the world
we kind of reside
to at one point
and then our real
life is in that world?
And I like to think that
they're both worlds that
are equally important.
And they influence one another.
So for example,
like, you might--
let's say-- I guess,
a very simple example
is, like, you watch
a scary movie.
And then, the monster from that
movie ends up in your dream.
So that's, like,
the waking world
affecting the dream world.
And we were talking a moment ago
about having a phenomenal dream
and feeling all
happy and uplifting.
That emotion translating
into this world
is a connection between the two.
>>REGINA: Right.
And the emotion can
sometimes guide you
back, but not necessarily.
>>ZEIZEL: True.
The emotion, it acts
as like a thread
or a trail of breadcrumbs.
And so a lot of times,
people will say,
like, how do I lucid dream?
And I'll always start,
like, start writing down
the dreams you're having.
And they go, oh, I don't
remember the dreams.
And I was like, OK, well,
write whatever you do remember.
I was like, was
there the color red?
Was there-- was it a
dream with your dad?
And they're like, oh, I
don't even remember that.
But what they do have,
often, is an emotion.
And that's a great
place to start.
And so it could just be you
wake up, you're feeling happy.
Or sometimes, you're
feeling anxious.
Just write that down.
And sometimes, that might be it.
>>REGINA: OK, so getting into
some of the nuts and bolts,
because this is a
step-by-step book with a lot
of wonderful anecdotes in it.
And one of the things
is first of all,
you have to be aware
that you're dreaming.
So we go into, what?
Three to five REM cycles a
night-- deep sleep cycles
where we're dreaming.
So if anyone says,
oh, I never dream, no.
No, you just don't remember.
We're all dreaming.
We're all dreaming,
all the time.
So you go into these
various states.
And depending on
when you wake up--
after the first or the
last cycle, and so forth--
you encourage people, of
course, to have a dream journal
and write the dreams down,
as we talked about earlier.
But the first thing is, one has
to realize they're dreaming.
And let's talk about a couple of
the techniques you give people.
Because you have some
homework in your waking hours,
in order to get to this place.
>>ZEIZEL: It does.
And I think, like you said,
finding that awareness--
and it is a bit of a
tricky, tricky game,
especially if you've
never had a lucid dream.
And you're trying to essentially
become aware of something
where you're not
actually currently
aware while you're in it.
So all the techniques
really stem
from kind of
manipulating our mind,
or focusing our mind
to detect the dream
state without us being
consciously aware of it yet.
And as soon as we can detect
it, well then, it's like--
you're instantly like, now
you're in a lucid dream.
>>REGINA: So give
some of the techniques
that you would do
during the day,
for example, once you've
committed to finding out
that you're in the dream
state, and the process
of lucid dreaming.
>>ZEIZEL: So one of
the great techniques--
and it's a bit of homework,
but it's not going to, like,
eat into your day-- is
just, a couple of times
throughout the day, asking
yourself, am I dreaming?
And just saying,
like, am I dreaming?
Oh, no, I'm not dreaming because
I'm driving to work right now.
But saying, am I dreaming?
And taking a brief moment
to actually think about it.
Like, wait a second.
Like, is there any
weird moments going on?
Is there a pink elephant
walking across the street?
Like, that might be a sign that
you're either at the surface,
or that you're dreaming.
But saying that-- and you can
do it during certain moments.
Like, every time you walk
through your front door,
ask the question, am I dreaming?
Or, every time you get in
your car, am I dreaming?
>>REGINA: You're starting to
set the pattern of the question
so that it can translate
into dream time.
>>ZEIZEL: Exactly.
And then all this
leads up to, a moment
where you're in the dream,
and your body and your mind
that has become accustomed
to asking that question,
asks the question,
am I dreaming?
And in the dream, you at
first, would be like, oh, no.
I'm not dreaming.
And then go, wait.
Wait a second.
I just flew to this party.
I'm in a dream.
And that's, like,
the moment where
you've switched from not being
lucid, to becoming lucid.
>>REGINA: Now what about these
little points of validation?
Like, am I dreaming?
And for example, someone
might look at their hands.
And normally, you
would count 10 fingers.
And you give that-- one
woman gave that example
as finally, the day came
where went, am I dreaming?
I have 11 fingers, I'm dreaming.
So give a couple
of little points,
ways in which we
can anchor this in.
>>ZEIZEL: Sure.
And these little tips
are really because you
can ask the question-- like,
I can ask the question,
am I dreaming?
And I might be like, wait
a second, I am dreaming.
I'm very, very rarely
on camera, like,
doing an interview like this.
So how can I be sure?
And so we have different things,
like counting your fingers.
Or, the one I personally
like is trying
to push my finger through
the palm of my hand.
And in lucid dreams, the
finger always goes through.
And in this world, I guess,
I'm doing it right now.
It's not going through.
So this must be real.
But you can do-- you know, you
can do stuff like turning on,
like, a light switch.
Sometimes, the wiring
in the dream world
isn't quite like the
wiring in our world.
Or, people often do reading of,
like, if there's a book there,
look at it, read it, see what
it says, and then look away.
Now go back.
Does it say the same thing?
You can also try--
one other thing I
like is jumping.
You might have to do
it at the right moment.
It might not be work
appropriate if you're in, like,
a board meeting.
>>REGINA: Right, right.
>>ZEIZEL: But take a
moment and jump up.
And often, in the dream,
we kind of-- we float down.
Or there's this--
>>REGINA: Yes, you
hover or something.
Yes.
>>ZEIZEL: Yeah, there's this
almost molasses to the physics
in the dream world.
And so all this
stuff is to really
be evidence to what world
you're in, whether you're
in the waking world.
>>REGINA: Before you can
make the choice of what
you're going to do, that you
need to know where you are.
>>ZEIZEL: Exactly.
>>REGINA: And you know,
along that line, we say,
oh, pinch yourself to
see if you're in a dream.
Years ago, for-- oh, gosh, I
think it was over the course
of at least a dozen years,
maybe more than that--
I would dream that I was going
to have a baby, because I
was told when I was young,
you'll never have a child.
So this became a
subconscious issue.
So I dreamed that I was
pregnant and I was going
to have a son, a baby boy.
And so, in the dream, I'd been
through this so many times,
I would pinch myself
and say, oh, it hurt.
I'm not dreaming this time.
And then, as years
went on, I would
go through that process even
three times, and then say, no.
It's not a dream,
and then it would
be a dream within a dream,
a dream within a dream.
And even after-- no, I've done
this three different layers,
this is not a dream because
it hurt every time-- then
I'd wake up.
>>ZEIZEL: Yeah.
And part of that is, like,
because sometimes, it
does work.
But then, all these techniques
may be safer, the finger
going through the hand.
>>REGINA: Exactly.
>>ZEIZEL: Like, they don't--
because you could actually
have a dream where your finger
doesn't go through the hand.
So we try to give a
couple different options.
>>REGINA: Yes, better than
just trying to pinch yourself.
>>ZEIZEL: Mm-hmm.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>ZEIZEL: Yeah.
And so it's all just--
you know, because it's
this weird thing that we're
trying to catch
but we're not aware
that we're trying
to catch it, we
have to be flexible and
try different things.
And this always goes to, like,
one of the key things is, like,
keep an open mind.
And just know that if you
want to have a lucid dream,
you will eventually
have a lucid dream.
Because everyone who dreams has
the ability to become lucid.
And starting with that as a
foundation is a great thing.
And sometimes, people,
they just-- knowing
that they can have a lucid
dream, that very night,
they'll get a little bit of
awareness in their dream.
>>REGINA: Yes.
OK, now let's talk about
the various cycles.
Because there are some people
who have impeded sleep.
We'll talk about
that in a moment.
So we have these,
say, average four
or five different
cycles a night,
where we go in and out
of deep dream state.
Is there a given cycle
or particular cycle
that's more advantageous
to interface
with on a lucid basis for us?
>>ZEIZEL: Definitely.
What we're trying to do--
you know, when we're trying
to have a lucid dream--
is we're trying to
catch that REM stage.
And you know, that's where the
majority of our dreams happen.
And so the potency of the
dream is at its highest
in the REM stage.
These other stages,
we're kind of--
I almost like to look at it
as like this roller coaster.
So we start up here.
We're awake.
Then we slowly drift down.
And our body is slowing down
physically-- our heart rate,
our core temperature.
Then we hit this deep sleep.
And in that stage, our
body is fixing itself.
And then we start coming up.
And we get higher and higher.
And then, we're actually
about to wake up,
but we actually stay just
beneath the surface at REM.
And that's when
our dreams happen.
And that's when it's the best
time to have a lucid dream.
So--
>>REGINA: How do
you program that?
>>ZEIZEL: Well, the good
thing is, we're already
programmed naturally.
And I know different
things and external things
might change if you're
on a certain medication,
or what you ate.
But for the base, that's
already programmed in us.
And part of learning
how to lucid dream
is understanding what
your programming is.
So REM usually-- or, I should
say, the largest period of REM
usually happens about four to
six hours after you initially
went to sleep.
You've already gone through
two or three full sleep cycles
with REM included.
But the REM period has
been very short in those.
And when you get to
later in your sleep,
the REM period is longer.
So you want to
try to catch that.
And so what we talk about
is doing a wake back to bed.
And so what a wake
back to bed is you
sleep for about
four to six hours.
And you know, it is
a two hour range.
But that's because we're
all a little bit different.
And finding when your
REM clicks in-- and so
want to wake up right before
that REM starts, but not
wake up fully.
You want to keep your body
still at rest so you go back
to sleep, but you're
starting to wake up
your mind so that you can
become present in the dream.
And so you wake up.
You might be up for about,
oh, 15 to 30 minutes.
And you should
think about dreaming
and think about becoming lucid.
You can even read a
chapter in the book.
And then you go back to
sleep, keeping in mind, like,
all right.
I will become lucid.
And then you go into REM.
And the hope is
that those thoughts
from when you were
awake are still
at the forefront of your mind.
And then you ask that
question, am I dreaming?
And you go, yes.
I'm dreaming.
And then you're lucid--
and now, you're
lucid in your dream.
>>REGINA: So this is usually in
the wee hours of the morning,
or even after the last
REM cycle sometimes?
Which, I mean, I've always
found the last REM cycle
before waking for the day
is usually where, of course,
the best memory comes through.
>>ZEIZEL: So there's a
little bit of trial and error
when finding kind of what you're
naturally programmed to do.
But once you find
that spot, then when
it's time to do a wake back
to bed, you designate an hour.
It's Friday night.
I don't have to worry
about work tomorrow.
I'm going to do awake
back to bed tonight.
And you're like,
all right, I know
that the way my
body functions is I
have the biggest REM cycle
six hours after I go to bed.
And so you set your alarm.
You have to estimate
a little bit.
>>REGINA: Or, can you just
program the subconscious mind
to wake you up at that time?
>>ZEIZEL: You know, sometimes.
And it's funny.
Whenever I have a big
thing the next day,
I always wake up
before my alarm.
>>REGINA: Yeah, I do too,
like a minute before.
>>ZEIZEL: And actually,
we don't really
talk about kind of program
in your mind in that way.
We sort of rely on
the alarm clock.
But that's a great thing.
Because the reason you're
waking up is you've
deemed something very important.
>>REGINA: It's set in there.
>>ZEIZEL: Yeah.
I got to catch a flight.
I don't want to miss the flight.
So you've reinforced
that idea that
waking up at this particular
time is extremely important.
And when we can put that same
importance to our dream lives,
then we become closer
to having a lucid dream,
or building that relationship
with the dream world.
>>REGINA: And let's talk
about the ways in which once--
and all of that's in this book.
So people can read
the book, and they're
going to see all the
ways in which they
can set the intention all the
way through to then utilizing
well that lucid dream time.
And one of the ways is to
overcome challenges in life,
for example.
A lot of people are
even afraid to go
to sleep because of nightmares.
You can actually go in
and you can inquire--
can you not-- if you are, say,
a person that has nightmares?
>>ZEIZEL: Oh, definitely.
And nightmares-- this
is a weird saying,
but nightmares hold a
special place in my heart.
Because they are so potent with
who we are, what our fears are.
And I find them one
of the easiest ways
to get-- to become lucid.
So some might think,
well, what is a nightmare?
A nightmare can be just
from a scary movie,
and then the next day it's gone.
Or it can be, like, a
deep-seated anxiety.
>>REGINA: It could
be reoccurring.
>>ZEIZEL: It could
It could be even stemming
from PTSD or depression.
Nightmares are very common.
And a nightmare
is something that
is not an enjoyable experience.
And it is completely reasonable
to be afraid of a nightmare.
Like, I had plenty of
nightmares when I was a kid.
And it's like, I
don't want to dream,
or I want to sleep because I
don't want to deal with that.
But for a lot of
nightmares, especially
the really potent ones that
come from deep-seated anxiety
or something in us,
they're not going
to go away just willy-nilly.
Because, really, it's
something that you're not
dealing with internally.
And so by becoming lucid, you
can then enter the nightmare.
It does take a little
bit of courage at times.
Like, you've got to
face down an adversary.
But you can then
ask the adversary,
you know, why are
you chasing me?
Why are you-- you
know, why do you
keep showing up in my dreams?
And very often, after
confronting the nightmare,
the nightmare will then leave.
Or it will kind of lead you
into the next understanding
of why it's there.
It might answer you.
And it could even become more
fearsome if you're ignoring it,
because it's trying
to get your attention.
It's desperately
trying to let you know.
Because it's not a boogey man.
It's not a monster.
It's not an axe murderer.
>>REGINA: It's some
un-healed aspect.
>>ZEIZEL: Yeah, it's an
un-healed aspect of you.
And at times, we can scare
ourselves about ourselves.
But part of-- I feel like--
understanding the world
and understanding ourselves
is dealing with the more
unpleasant aspects of it.
Another thing that
I do personally
is, like, whenever I have
a nightmare, it's like, oh,
it's time to become lucid.
And so I'll have a nightmare
in one form or another.
And I almost always
wake up from it,
because I'm usually shocked
awake because I'm so scared.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>ZEIZEL: And I say to
myself, all right, Jared.
You're about to go
back into the dream.
Those monsters are still there.
They're waiting for you.
They know you're coming back.
But when you get
there, remember,
as soon as you see
them, that it's a dream.
And you'll become lucid.
And you can deal with them.
And like, almost--
because sometimes, I've
set the intention to
have a lucid dream
and it doesn't always happen.
But 100% of those moments with
nightmares, I become lucid.
And I think that's
because nightmares
are so important in
understanding who we are.
And the reason they're so
scary is because in a way,
the nightmare knows
that it has to be known.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>ZEIZEL: And so this
isn't to say that if you're
having terrible
nightmares, like, tonight
is the night you have to go back
in and face it and overcome it.
No, these things take time.
And each person is different in
how they deal with their fears
and what's bothering them.
But by trying to
become lucid, you're
actively taking a step
to deal with perhaps
an unresolved conflict
or something that
has been bothering you
in your daily life.
>>REGINA: Well,
that's why think it's
so-- that's why I
wanted to bring up
the subject of nightmares.
Because it seems
to me, that's maybe
the most practical
use of lucid dreaming,
is to get in and clear stuff up.
>>ZEIZEL: Oh, definitely.
>>REGINA: I mean,
yeah, to fly and to do
all of these other
things are just fun.
I mean, It feels good.
The sensations are
great and all that.
But to go in and
clear our fears--
and also, use it for healing,
healing physical, or mental,
or emotional ailments.
We can use lucid
dreaming to do that.
Let's talk about the
notion of having, say,
whether it's a person,
a sage, an animal,
as a partner that we use
in dream time for healing.
>>ZEIZEL: Definitely.
And I think, like,
everything you just said
is really important--
and having sort of
a sage or an animal,
or you know, what we refer to
in the book as a spirit guide.
And sometimes, people get
turned off by the word spirit.
So just look at it as a mentor.
>>REGINA: Our audience
is good with it.
>>ZEIZEL: OK, all right.
So a spirit guide.
And they're there
to help you navigate
this dream world, which is
sometimes very confusing,
can be full of fears.
Or sometimes, it's
just pure strangeness.
And you need help
grasping at it.
And sometimes, I wonder, is my--
and my spirit
guides go through--
they change.
At one point, it was
like an old woman.
When I was younger,
it was a tiger.
Now it's this big, giant
grayish-purple bear.
So I wonder, is this a product
of something inside me?
Or is this an external
component that is--
>>REGINA: --there to assist you?
>>ZEIZEL: Exactly.
And so this leans
into people sometimes
go into the dream world.
And they disrespect
the dream characters.
Sometimes there's
no consequences.
But why do-- well, why
even take that time
to disrespect them
or hurt them, when
they could possibly
show something to you,
or they happened to just be you?
Or, in this case,
with a spirit guide,
it's someone who's there to
actually guide you and bring
you to a further degree of
development in your life--
both in your waking life,
and your dream life.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
And then there are the
times where we have--
I've had different series
of repetitious dreams.
But one of them was a
self-mastery kind of dream that
started when I was 3, and had no
control over the situation of--
they were car dreams.
So cars careening down
the hill, and I realized
no parents are in the car.
And it's going to
go into the ocean.
So of course, you wake
up because there's
nothing you can do.
As time goes on, you get
your driver's license.
And then, as the dreams
progressed through the decades,
finally, the time came
where I was in a situation
and completely overcame
the effects of gravity.
And so I was in a
different world of physics.
And it was because I
had seen someone do it,
so I knew that I could do
this feat in this automobile.
And the dreams
stopped at that time.
They weren't lucid dreams,
they were recurring dreams.
But I was aware of the
progress through the years
to where, then, the need for
the dreams simply disappear.
And I think a lot of people have
these, where that sequence is
gone for a lifetime because
the mastery was done
by overcoming a certain fear.
>>ZEIZEL: Oh, yeah.
And I know from everything--
like you say, fears,
to creativity, to
just problem solving,
I can speak to the filmmaking
portion of my life.
And films, as we know, are
very expensive to make.
And you don't always
know, is this idea going
to look good or not, or work.
But by becoming lucid,
you can set it up.
You can set up the stage
and bring in the players,
and see, how does this
story that I've come up with
play out?
>>REGINA: It's true.
You could just
bring them all in,
do your auditions
in dream time first.
>>ZEIZEL: Exactly.
And some of them might be
a little bit more practical
to people.
Because often, we get
nervous before, say,
a job interview where we
have to give a presentation.
We'll give the
job, or do the job
interview or the presentation
in the dream world--
a place that is completely safe.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
Really good place
for practicing.
Now I want to go back to
what I was telling you
about a moment ago, because
I didn't bring about the most
important point of it.
Those were not lucid dreams.
Those were practice
dreams that I
happen to have good recall of.
Now how would, say, a
situation like that--
a decades long process of
self-mastery, so to speak--
be enhanced, had I actually
been in a lucid state?
>>ZEIZEL: It could have played
out in many different ways.
There is the thought that maybe
the mastery would have happened
sooner, that there's
probably-- often,
there's moments when we're
just normally dreaming,
where we're just
sort of spacing out.
We're just sort of
bringing stuff in.
We're not taking
a central action.
And what I've found
with, like, lucid dreams,
is that they really--
they bring you
to this present moment
in the dream world.
And so a very simple
example is someone calls.
I guess, this is
actually from the past
because we all
have caller ID now.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>ZEIZEL: But I
remember being younger.
And I my mom's
friend would call.
And she'd say, oh, have her
call me back at this number.
And if I didn't take that moment
to, like, write down the number
or remember that she actually
called, I'd forget it.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>ZEIZEL: Of course, hours and
hours later, we're at dinner,
and I'm like, oh, Mom.
You know, your friend called.
And of course, my mom would be
upset that I waited so long.
But that's just like a
small example of, like,
bringing the present moment and
taking that time can strengthen
whatever we are trying to do--
whether it's just remembering
a number or master
a certain skill.
>>REGINA: And again, when you--
I just want to go
back to this one point
you mentioned a
little bit ago too.
When you're in the dream, the
various players that are around
you in the dream, maybe
we need to consciously
make a note to
ourselves that we need
to start noting who
these people are,
rather than just
having random people
who we're bumping
into or passing by--
or whatnot-- in our dreams,
really start paying attention
to who is in our dreams?
>>ZEIZEL: Definitely.
And, like, we were talking--
you know, my earlier
years of lucid dreaming,
it was all flying,
motorcycle races,
very action-oriented stuff.
As I've gotten older,
I found far more--
I guess-- excitement
and interest
in actually just talking
with the dream characters.
>>REGINA: Interesting.
>>ZEIZEL: Because sometimes,
you run into someone,
they have nothing to say.
They just sort of--
it's a wandering entity.
But more often than not,
they'll tell you something.
It doesn't always make sense,
but it always means something.
It's something either
from inside you,
maybe externally, but something
that's important to you.
And sometimes, it takes days
or months to actually decipher
that meaning.
But it is a worthwhile
conversation
to have from what we
can learn from it.
>>REGINA: Yes.
And you know, the spectrum of--
I mean, to me, the
interesting spectrum
of things that can
occur in dream time.
OK, one of the things that's
more sensational-- as you call,
kind of the superhero things--
we've talked about looking
someone in the eye,
getting your messages, having
your totem animals there
to help you with something
you need to heal--
nightmares, and so forth.
Now let's talk about some of
the fun and fantastical stuff.
Because I don't know
anyone that doesn't
enjoy flying in their dreams.
But you're-- in the book,
you're saying that even if you
don't have flying dreams, you
can teach yourself to have
a flying dream.
>>ZEIZEL: Yeah.
And this goes-- you're talking
about mastery over stuff?
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>ZEIZEL: We go into
the dream world kind
of like we go into this world.
You know, some babies,
toddlers, they just
start learning their
numbers and alphabet sooner
than the other ones.
So sometimes, we go into a
dream, and we just take off
and we can fly.
But you know, more
often than not,
these are skills
we have to learn.
So we might be able
to, say, take off.
But now we're going
faster and faster.
And we don't know,
like, how to land.
Or we don't know,
like, how to turn.
And so we do, kind of in the
book-- in the later chapters--
get into some of the skills
and quote, "super powers"
in the dream world, and
how you can kind of--
how you can begin to
learn how to do it.
So flying is
everyone's favorite.
And often, like, if you
can't fly in the beginning,
it's because your mind is
accustomed to the physical laws
of this world.
We can't fly.
I wish we could, but we can't.
And so our mind, like,
almost has this program
in the dream world.
It's like, oh,
you're a human being.
You don't have wings.
You can't fly.
So we have to start
to undo that a bit.
>>REGINA: Maybe thinking
about the intention that I
want to fly tonight in
my dream, and really
making that a strong intention.
And then you give tools
for different ways
in which you might execute
that once you're lucid
and you know you're in
this dream time, right?
>>ZEIZEL: And I'm glad you
brought up the intention.
Because intent-- everything
starts from an intention.
Just the intention to
remember your dreams,
to become lucid, then to fly.
You want to make that
intention as strong as you can.
And then from that, like,
you had that intention.
And it's like, all right.
In the dream world, I can fly.
So now you've already
done a little bit
of that sort of programming
from this world--
>>REGINA: --even by
imagining it, yes.
>>ZEIZEL: And then
you could do, like,
little-- you know, then,
it's kind of going back
to the finger thing.
It's like, little tricks
that-- it's like, all right.
Well, let me see if I can
find, like, a set of wings
in the dream world.
Or let me just see--
not fly, but just
see how high I can jump.
And just try and jump
higher and higher.
And let's see.
Now let me run and
jump, and see--
like, kind of coast
a bit in the air.
And sure enough, you try
out different things.
And you experiment with it.
You start to find that
you'll make progress.
>>REGINA: I've found that over--
again, none of this is lucid.
I'm not a lucid dreamer.
But now, after
reading this book,
I realize I need to dedicate
myself to doing that just
to have even more fun.
Because I already
have great dreams.
But in the flying
dreams, they started
as a certain very primitive
type of flapping my wings going
into the wind, right?
And then, as the years went on,
of course, you just take a leap
and you're just soaring.
But it evolved over
a period of time.
>>ZEIZEL: Definitely.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>ZEIZEL: And stuff like
even moving beyond flying.
There's often the idea
of transportation.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>ZEIZEL: I guess flying is
a form of transportation.
But so is teleportation.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>ZEIZEL: And that often
can be very difficult.
If flying seems otherworldly--
>>REGINA: Yeah, teleport.
>>ZEIZEL: --teleporting
is supernatural.
And so with the--
something with teleportation,
just like a little thing
is like, all right,
well, we know
the dream world is malleable.
We know that it doesn't abide by
the physical laws of the waking
world.
So doing something
like, all right,
just closing your eyes
in the dream world.
And it's like, all right,
I'm in a field right now.
And I'm going to open them.
And I'm going to be in
the middle of the city.
Or, perhaps it's
usually the reverse.
You want to get out of the city.
But closing those eyes,
and then you open them,
it isn't 100% guarantee.
But it's a step towards making
that a reality and undoing,
again, the
programming that we've
sort of taken from this world.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>ZEIZEL: Now I talk about--
like, when I say undoing
programming from the waking
world, I don't mean it in
a purely negative sense.
Because we don't want
to necessarily try
to fly in this world.
We have to be aware of
the two different realms.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>ZEIZEL: But there's
a lot of stuff.
We've sort of pushed dreams to
the side in our modern culture.
>>REGINA: And like
you say, when you
do these things-- these super
heroic types of ventures--
it actually can come back
and translate into increased
confidence in the waking world.
>>ZEIZEL: Totally.
And that's something that--
talking about giving a
presentation and being nervous.
It's like, when you can
fly, when you can teleport--
even if it's now, like in this
world-- but you actually--
>>REGINA: --at
your will, lucidly.
Yes.
>>ZEIZEL: Definitely.
And you get that sensation.
And you're fully aware
and conscious of that.
Well, giving a little
presentation, that's nothing.
You were just
flying around, like,
Mount Everest a few hours ago.
>>REGINA: So it's a real-- to
be able to master dream time is
a real confidence-builder.
>>ZEIZEL: Oh, definitely.
And especially everything from
stuff like anxieties to fears,
it all can help you get the
confidence and the mental state
of mind to overcome that.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
What could you not work
out, really, in dream time?
Because anything is possible.
Theoretically, if you have even
an issue with another human
being-- a relationship
type of issue--
you should be able, if
you're in lucid dreaming,
to go in and consciously
address that, shouldn't you?
>>ZEIZEL: I actually
have had a dream.
This was a while
ago, but I remember
it very clearly
because at the time,
I was having a difficulty
with my brother.
It was in high school.
And as younger brothers go, they
tend to copy everything you do.
And being an older brother,
and a little teenage angst,
I just want to get
away from that.
And so I would, like, push
him aside in the waking world.
And then in the dream world,
he'd start showing up.
And I'd be like, oh, man.
Like, even in my dreams?
>>REGINA: Can't
get away from him.
>>ZEIZEL: Yeah.
And so there was this
one dream we were having.
And we were actually in
the backyard of my house.
And then, it started to
turn into a nightmare.
And some people showed up,
and they shot my brother.
And I was like, oh.
Like, well, I can't
just push him away now.
He's bleeding.
He's dying.
I've got to get
him to a hospital.
And so in this
dream, I take him.
And I bring him to the hospital.
And they start fixing him up.
And then those people who
shot him, they turned.
They were people at first,
then they turned into monsters.
And they appeared
at the hospital.
And they started
shooting everyone.
And then at that point, I was
not lucid up until that moment.
And it was when
they shot something.
And I remember
reaching out because it
was going to my brother,
and I caught the bullet.
And I was like, wait a second.
I can't catch bullets.
This is a dream.
And I tell my dream
character of my brother,
like, this is a dream.
We need to get
rid of these guys.
So we fought these monsters
and got rid of them.
And then I woke up, I
realized, I shouldn't
push my brother away
for many reasons,
but that we're in
stuff together.
We're in this life together.
And while at times,
he's annoying and stuff,
it's important to remember that
there's not a malice in why
he wanted to hang out.
I don't quite know his reason,
but maybe a little admiration.
>>REGINA: Exactly.
>>ZEIZEL: And that was
the important part.
And even through this
dream, I was able, then,
to bring back that idea of
becoming closer to my brother.
>>REGINA: That's beautiful.
So we're about out of time.
Do you think that mastering
our dream time might be,
really, one of the next
really big evolutionary steps
for humanity?
>>ZEIZEL: I would say so.
And it's funny,
because we think back
to our ancient tribes
and ancient people.
They already had
mastery of their dreams.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>ZEIZEL: And so it's
almost like we've evolved
wonderfully in many, many ways.
But we've also lost some
stuff in the process.
So I do think it's like
we should recapture that.
And that can bring
us to a new stage.
And looking at dreams,
it's not just this thing
that happens at night.
Oh, it's just a dream.
But really taking time out of
our lives and saying, like,
dreams are important.
>>REGINA: They're
very important, yes.
>>ZEIZEL: It's an inside
look to my subconscious.
I shouldn't just brush it off.
I should take the moment.
And even if it's just focusing
on dreams, lucid or not,
that's like one step.
But when you become
lucid, then you actually
can start interacting
with it and exploring it,
and reaching a new stage.
>>REGINA: Well, I mean,
you certainly inspired me.
And I alluded to something
a little while ago.
And that is that when people
have kind of chronic sleeping
issues, for example--
I mean, most women I
know over the age of 40
don't sleep all that deeply.
They're in and out.
So their sleep itself
becomes so precious,
that they are very
reticent to give anything
up to remembering
dreams, for example.
It's like, oh, no.
If I wake up, my
brain will be awake.
I'll never get back to sleep.
And so you're talking
about the rest of the life,
oftentimes, just lost.
All the dreams lost
from that time on.
What kind of-- you said your
mom has gone through this.
What kind of advice
would you give
people that are just clinging
to any little shreds of sleep
they have?
>>ZEIZEL: Well, I sometimes
say, we look at sleep
as very important physically.
But dreams are
also very important
for our mental health.
And they've done studies
where if you skip over
your period of REM--
and actually, we
experience this.
You have to wake up early.
And then you're like, you have
a little time in the afternoon,
you take a nap.
And very often, you jump
right into the period of REM.
And so looking at sleep
as an important component,
but also dreams as a component--
>>REGINA: --as an equally
important component.
>>ZEIZEL: Yeah.
>>REGINA: Yes.
That's a good point.
>>ZEIZEL: No stranger to, like,
our physical health, as well as
our mental health.
And dreams kind of take care
of the mental component,
while deep sleep takes care
of the physical component.
>>REGINA: And who knows?
Maybe if we're lucid
in our dream time,
we can even address the
subject of our nervous system
and our lack of sleep to get
deeper sleep and lucid dream.
>>ZEIZEL: Yeah, there's
so much to be explored.
And a great doorway into that
is through lucid dreaming.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
Well, we're out of time.
First of all, thank
Dylan and Thomas.
>>ZEIZEL: I will.
>>REGINA: I know they
couldn't be here as well.
But I really want
to thank all of you
for doing such a lovely
job on this book.
And sometimes, like I said,
it's the moment that the book
arrives and you think, yeah.
It's time begin another
level of mastery in life.
And I think you've done an
excellent guide to that.
>>ZEIZEL: Oh, thank
you very much.
And thank you for
having me on your show.
>>REGINA: You're so welcome.
Again, the name of the
book is "The Field Guide
to Lucid Dreaming".
And it's a truly useful book.
I love the book.
I'll be giving it
to people as gifts.
Also, if you enjoyed
this interview,
you might also
enjoy my interviews
with Robert Moss and
his work with dreamers.
Until next time, thank you for
joining us here on Gaiam TV.
[THEME MUSIC]